bin/dnssec/dnssec-importkey.rst, before:

.. Copyright (C) Internet Systems Consortium, Inc. ("ISC")
..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: MPL-2.0
..
.. This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
.. License, v. 2.0.  If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
.. file, you can obtain one at https://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
..
.. See the COPYRIGHT file distributed with this work for additional
.. information regarding copyright ownership.

.. highlight: console

.. iscman:: dnssec-importkey
.. program:: dnssec-importkey
.. _man_dnssec-importkey:

dnssec-importkey - import DNSKEY records from external systems so they can be managed
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Synopsis
~~~~~~~~

:program:`dnssec-importkey` [**-K** directory] [**-L** ttl] [**-P** date/offset] [**-P** sync date/offset] [**-D** date/offset] [**-D** sync date/offset] [**-h**] [**-v** level] [**-V**] {keyfile}

:program:`dnssec-importkey` {**-f** filename} [**-K** directory] [**-L** ttl] [**-P** date/offset] [**-P** sync date/offset] [**-D** date/offset] [**-D** sync date/offset] [**-h**] [**-v** level] [**-V**] [dnsname]

Description
~~~~~~~~~~~

:program:`dnssec-importkey` reads a public DNSKEY record and generates a pair
of .key/.private files. The DNSKEY record may be read from an
existing .key file, in which case a corresponding .private file is
generated, or it may be read from any other file or from the standard
input, in which case both .key and .private files are generated.

The newly created .private file does *not* contain private key data, and
cannot be used for signing. However, having a .private file makes it
possible to set publication (:option:`-P`) and deletion (:option:`-D`) times for the
key, which means the public key can be added to and removed from the
DNSKEY RRset on schedule even if the true private key is stored offline.

Options
~~~~~~~

.. option:: -f filename

   This option indicates the zone file mode. Instead of a public keyfile name, the argument is the
   DNS domain name of a zone master file, which can be read from
   ``filename``. If the domain name is the same as ``filename``, then it may be
   omitted.

   If ``filename`` is set to ``"-"``, then the zone data is read from the
   standard input.

.. option:: -K directory

   This option sets the directory in which the key files are to reside.

.. option:: -L ttl

   This option sets the default TTL to use for this key when it is converted into a
   DNSKEY RR. This is the TTL used when the key is imported into a zone,
   unless there was already a DNSKEY RRset in
   place, in which case the existing TTL takes precedence. Setting the default TTL to ``0`` or ``none``
   removes it from the key.

.. option:: -h

   This option emits a usage message and exits.

.. option:: -v level

   This option sets the debugging level.

.. option:: -V

   This option prints version information.

Timing Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Dates can be expressed in the format YYYYMMDD or YYYYMMDDHHMMSS.
(which is the format used inside key files),
or 'Day Mon DD HH:MM:SS YYYY' (as printed by ``dnssec-settime -p``),
or UNIX epoch time (as printed by ``dnssec-settime -up``),
or the literal ``now``.

The argument can be followed by ``+`` or ``-`` and an offset from the
given time. The literal ``now`` can be omitted before an offset. The
offset can be followed by one of the suffixes ``y``, ``mo``, ``w``,
``d``, ``h``, or ``mi``, so that it is computed in years (defined as
365 24-hour days, ignoring leap years), months (defined as 30 24-hour
days), weeks, days, hours, or minutes, respectively. Without a suffix,
the offset is computed in seconds.

To explicitly prevent a date from being set, use ``none``, ``never``,
or ``unset``.

All these formats are case-insensitive.

.. option:: -P date/offset

   This option sets the date on which a key is to be published to the zone. After
   that date, the key is included in the zone but is not used
   to sign it.

   .. program:: dnssec-importkey -P
   .. option:: sync date/offset

      This option sets the date on which CDS and CDNSKEY records that match this key
      are to be published to the zone.

.. program:: dnssec-importkey

.. option:: -D date/offset

   This option sets the date on which the key is to be deleted. After that date, the
   key is no longer included in the zone. (However, it may remain in the key
   repository.)

   .. program:: dnssec-importkey -D
   .. option:: sync date/offset

      This option sets the date on which the CDS and CDNSKEY records that match this
      key are to be deleted.

.. program:: dnssec-importkey


Files
~~~~~

A keyfile can be designed by the key identification ``Knnnn.+aaa+iiiii``
or the full file name ``Knnnn.+aaa+iiiii.key``, as generated by
:iscman:`dnssec-keygen`.

See Also
~~~~~~~~

:iscman:`dnssec-keygen(8) <dnssec-keygen>`, :iscman:`dnssec-signzone(8) <dnssec-signzone>`, BIND 9 Administrator Reference Manual,
:rfc:`5011`.

Commit message:

Add dnssec-policy text for dnssec-importkey
You should not use dnssec-importkey to import DNSKEY records from
other providers (for example when setting up multi-signer).

Clarify this in the manpage.

bin/dnssec/dnssec-importkey.rst, after:

.. Copyright (C) Internet Systems Consortium, Inc. ("ISC")
..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: MPL-2.0
..
.. This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
.. License, v. 2.0.  If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
.. file, you can obtain one at https://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
..
.. See the COPYRIGHT file distributed with this work for additional
.. information regarding copyright ownership.

.. highlight: console

.. iscman:: dnssec-importkey
.. program:: dnssec-importkey
.. _man_dnssec-importkey:

dnssec-importkey - import DNSKEY records from external systems so they can be managed
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Synopsis
~~~~~~~~

:program:`dnssec-importkey` [**-K** directory] [**-L** ttl] [**-P** date/offset] [**-P** sync date/offset] [**-D** date/offset] [**-D** sync date/offset] [**-h**] [**-v** level] [**-V**] {keyfile}

:program:`dnssec-importkey` {**-f** filename} [**-K** directory] [**-L** ttl] [**-P** date/offset] [**-P** sync date/offset] [**-D** date/offset] [**-D** sync date/offset] [**-h**] [**-v** level] [**-V**] [dnsname]

Description
~~~~~~~~~~~

:program:`dnssec-importkey` reads a public DNSKEY record and generates a pair
of .key/.private files. The DNSKEY record may be read from an
existing .key file, in which case a corresponding .private file is
generated, or it may be read from any other file or from the standard
input, in which case both .key and .private files are generated.

The newly created .private file does *not* contain private key data, and
cannot be used for signing. However, having a .private file makes it
possible to set publication (:option:`-P`) and deletion (:option:`-D`) times for the
key, which means the public key can be added to and removed from the
DNSKEY RRset on schedule even if the true private key is stored offline.

When using ``dnssec-policy``, do not use :program:`dnssec-importkey` to
import key files that cannot be used for signing. In this case, simply publish the
imported DNSKEY record in the zone, and make sure that the files are outside
the configured ``key-directory``.

Options
~~~~~~~

.. option:: -f filename

   This option indicates the zone file mode. Instead of a public keyfile name, the argument is the
   DNS domain name of a zone master file, which can be read from
   ``filename``. If the domain name is the same as ``filename``, then it may be
   omitted.

   If ``filename`` is set to ``"-"``, then the zone data is read from the
   standard input.

.. option:: -K directory

   This option sets the directory in which the key files are to reside.

.. option:: -L ttl

   This option sets the default TTL to use for this key when it is converted into a
   DNSKEY RR. This is the TTL used when the key is imported into a zone,
   unless there was already a DNSKEY RRset in
   place, in which case the existing TTL takes precedence. Setting the default TTL to ``0`` or ``none``
   removes it from the key.

.. option:: -h

   This option emits a usage message and exits.

.. option:: -v level

   This option sets the debugging level.

.. option:: -V

   This option prints version information.

Timing Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Dates can be expressed in the format YYYYMMDD or YYYYMMDDHHMMSS.
(which is the format used inside key files),
or 'Day Mon DD HH:MM:SS YYYY' (as printed by ``dnssec-settime -p``),
or UNIX epoch time (as printed by ``dnssec-settime -up``),
or the literal ``now``.

The argument can be followed by ``+`` or ``-`` and an offset from the
given time. The literal ``now`` can be omitted before an offset. The
offset can be followed by one of the suffixes ``y``, ``mo``, ``w``,
``d``, ``h``, or ``mi``, so that it is computed in years (defined as
365 24-hour days, ignoring leap years), months (defined as 30 24-hour
days), weeks, days, hours, or minutes, respectively. Without a suffix,
the offset is computed in seconds.

To explicitly prevent a date from being set, use ``none``, ``never``,
or ``unset``.

All these formats are case-insensitive.

.. option:: -P date/offset

   This option sets the date on which a key is to be published to the zone. After
   that date, the key is included in the zone but is not used
   to sign it.

   .. program:: dnssec-importkey -P
   .. option:: sync date/offset

      This option sets the date on which CDS and CDNSKEY records that match this key
      are to be published to the zone.

.. program:: dnssec-importkey

.. option:: -D date/offset

   This option sets the date on which the key is to be deleted. After that date, the
   key is no longer included in the zone. (However, it may remain in the key
   repository.)

   .. program:: dnssec-importkey -D
   .. option:: sync date/offset

      This option sets the date on which the CDS and CDNSKEY records that match this
      key are to be deleted.

.. program:: dnssec-importkey


Files
~~~~~

A keyfile can be designed by the key identification ``Knnnn.+aaa+iiiii``
or the full file name ``Knnnn.+aaa+iiiii.key``, as generated by
:iscman:`dnssec-keygen`.

See Also
~~~~~~~~

:iscman:`dnssec-keygen(8) <dnssec-keygen>`, :iscman:`dnssec-signzone(8) <dnssec-signzone>`, BIND 9 Administrator Reference Manual,
:rfc:`5011`.
