.gitlab/issue_templates/Bug.md, before:

<!--
If the bug you are reporting is potentially security-related - for example,
if it involves an assertion failure or other crash in `named` that can be
triggered repeatedly - then please make sure that you make the new issue
confidential by clicking the checkbox at the bottom!
-->

### Summary

<!-- Concisely summarize the bug encountered. -->

### BIND version affected
<!--
Make sure you are testing with the **latest** supported version of BIND
for a given branch. Many bugs have been fixed over time!

See https://kb.isc.org/docs/supported-platforms for the current list.
The latest source is available from https://www.isc.org/download/#BIND

Paste the output of `named -V` here.
-->

### Steps to reproduce

<!--
This is extremely important! Be precise and use itemized lists, please.

Even if a default configuration is affected, please include the full configuration
files _you were testing with_.

Example:
1. Use _attached_ configuration file
2. Start BIND server with command: `named -g -c named.conf ...`
3. Simulate legitimate clients using command `dnsperf -S1 -d legit-queries ...`
4. Simulate attack traffic using command `dnsperf -S1 -d attack-queries ...`
-->

1.
2.
3.

### What is the current *bug* behavior?

<!-- What actually happens. -->

### What is the expected *correct* behavior?

<!-- What you should see instead. -->

### Relevant configuration files

<!-- Paste any relevant configuration files here - please use code blocks (```)
to format console output. If submitting the contents of your
configuration file in a non-confidential issue, it is advisable to
obscure key secrets; this can be done automatically by using
`named-checkconf -px`. -->

### Relevant logs

<!-- Paste any relevant logs here - please use code blocks (```) to format console
output, logs, and code, as it's very hard to read otherwise. -->

/label ~Bug

Commit message:

Add a section about AI use in BIND 9 issue templates
Generally speaking, no AI generated slop is permitted.  If AI has been
used to find an actual problem, the findings need to be verified by a
person, and the report should be written by the person.  No copy and
paste is allowed.  Anyone reporting the problem needs to be able to
verify the problem independently of the AI.

.gitlab/issue_templates/Bug.md, after:

<!--
If the bug you are reporting is potentially security-related - for example,
if it involves an assertion failure or other crash in `named` that can be
triggered repeatedly - then please make sure that you make the new issue
confidential by clicking the checkbox at the bottom!
-->

<!--
If you found the problem in BIND 9 using generative AI tools and you have verified it
yourself to be true: write the report yourself and explain the problem as you
have learned it. This makes sure the AI-generated inaccuracies and invented
issues are filtered out early before they waste more people's time.  Even if you
write the report yourself, you must make sure to reveal the fact that
generative AI was used in your report.

We ban users immediately who submit fake reports to the project.
-->

### Summary

<!-- Concisely summarize the bug encountered. -->

### BIND version affected
<!--
Make sure you are testing with the **latest** supported version of BIND
for a given branch. Many bugs have been fixed over time!

See https://kb.isc.org/docs/supported-platforms for the current list.
The latest source is available from https://www.isc.org/download/#BIND

Paste the output of `named -V` here.
-->

### Steps to reproduce

<!--
This is extremely important! Be precise and use itemized lists, please.

Even if a default configuration is affected, please include the full configuration
files _you were testing with_.

Example:
1. Use _attached_ configuration file
2. Start BIND server with command: `named -g -c named.conf ...`
3. Simulate legitimate clients using command `dnsperf -S1 -d legit-queries ...`
4. Simulate attack traffic using command `dnsperf -S1 -d attack-queries ...`
-->

1.
2.
3.

### What is the current *bug* behavior?

<!-- What actually happens. -->

### What is the expected *correct* behavior?

<!-- What you should see instead. -->

### Relevant configuration files

<!-- Paste any relevant configuration files here - please use code blocks (```)
to format console output. If submitting the contents of your
configuration file in a non-confidential issue, it is advisable to
obscure key secrets; this can be done automatically by using
`named-checkconf -px`. -->

### Relevant logs

<!-- Paste any relevant logs here - please use code blocks (```) to format console
output, logs, and code, as it's very hard to read otherwise. -->

/label ~Bug
